

*On the* CAUSES *of the* DECAY *of the* TIMBER *in* SHIPS, *and the* MEANS *of preventing it, and the* DRY ROT.

THE advantages that England derives from her marine, whether considered as appertaining to commerce or defence, are too well known to need any comment; whatever, then, will contribute either to the safety or durability of the navy, becomes a matter of great public importance.

The grand cause of the decay of the timber employed in building of ships is the decomposition of its substances by putrefaction, which is occasioned by moisture. This, precautions and management may retard, but not prevent; but a secondary one, the dry rot, may, I think, be both prevented and eradicated.

The dry rot, as it is usually called, proceeds from the growth of a parasitical plant, named by botanists *boletus lachrymans*, which belongs to the class of cryptogamia. Its injurious tendency is mentioned as far back as history will carry us, and the appearance and ravages are particularly pointed out in the Bible.* The cure there directed is, to remove the materials injured; and, if this did not stop the disease, the house was razed, and the entire articles of which it was composed taken without the city. In latter times, an equally effectual, but more easy, remedy has been applied in buildings where this plant has taken root; that of causing a circulation of air in the parts affected; but this cannot be introduced in the fabrics of which we are now treating.

The fatal tendency of the dry rot in ships cannot be pointed out in a more forcible way, than it is in the memoirs of Pepys, who was secretary to the Admiralty during the reigns of Charles the IId and James the IId. At that time, a commission was formed to inquire into the state of the navy, by which it appeared, that there were thirty ships, called new ships, which, as he observes, "for want of proper care and attention, had toadstools growing in their holds as big as his fists, and were in so complete a state of decay, that some of the planks had dropped from their sides." From that time to the present, the evil has in some measure existed; and, although it has not since appeared in so great an extent as it then did, yet the state of some ships recently launched both justifies and demands all possible inquiry as to the causes of the growth of this fungus, and its prevention. Several means have been tried to prevent its vegetating, many of which might have answered this purpose, had they not been found to introduce evils as great as that which they pretended to cure. Among the most prominent, was the mode practised on the timbers of many ships,

***
\* Leviticus, chap. xiv.

Here is the transcription of the second page:

*On the* CAUSES *of the* DECAY *of the* TIMBER *in* SHIPS, *&c.* **429**

importance to inquire, which sort of this timber is the most durable, and which the soonest destroyed by vegetation. Pitch pine has been used by all nations in the construction of ships, and appears to be very superior to every other species for general durability: but this wood is the soonest destroyed by fungi, as these plants are nourished by the great quantity of resin contained in its numerous cells. I have lately seen some pitch pine plank of 7 inches in thickness completely decomposed; and, when cut open, the boletus was found to be vegetating in every part of it, but principally in the cells which were originally filled with resin. This proves how improper it will be to employ it as treenail fastenings, on which the strength and safety of ships so much depend. Pitch pine should not be covered with paint, as the pores of the wood are thereby stopped, and the expansion of the resin prevented, by which means the ligneous cells are broken, and decomposition takes place. The Americans pay the topsides of their ships with a mixture of oil, resin, &c. which are not unlike the substances that are contained in the wood they cover, and produce a hard varnish, impervious to water. Perhaps the preparation recommended by Dr. Parry,\* to prevent the dry rot, given in the Transactions of the Bath and West of England Societies, might be introduced also for this purpose with success. White wash or lime water to be used between decks is much to be preferred to paint, both on account of its cheapness and cleansing qualities, and also as it is detrimental to vegetation.

Instead of the frames of a ship being converted to their proper shape for some months before they are put up, and afterward standing on a slip a year to season, as is now the usual practice, I would recommend, that they should be converted, and remain, together with the planks, in that state (under cover where there shall be a free circulation of air) for two years, then charred, put up, and the planking immediately begun; commencing operations from within board, by which means chips and dirt will not accumulate between the timbers; care being taken, that the holes be not bored too near the seams in the outboard plank. Holes should be bored, but no treenails driven till within a short time of the ship's being launched; this will both convey air within board, and carry off the vegetable juices, if any remain in the interior of the timbers. The planks could be kept in their places by the usual butt bolts, and some copper nails, or small bolts ragged, being driven at intermediate spaces. This too would strengthen the ship, as metallic fastenings are always to be preferred, in the wales and bottom, to treenails.

An objection may be made to the bringing round thick planks in the bow of a ship by burning, rather than the usual practice of boiling them in a kiln, on account of breaking their fibres. Although I do not see, that any difficulty can exist in the former method, as it is the usual practice of the French, yet, if any should occur on trial, and boiling them be considered absolutely necessary, vegetation may be prevented by dissolving some green vitriol in the water, and afterward fixing it in the wood by a weak alkali.† The method approved of by many judicious shipwrights, and constantly practised by the Dutch, that of sawing the thick planks, that are to be much bent, into two parts, might also be employed for this purpose. If a doubt should exist of the efficacy of wood prepared in these several ways to prevent the dry rot, specimens might be placed in a ship almost destroyed thereby, such a one as I recollect to have seen at Woolwich about thirteen years since, which was in so bad a state, that the decks sunk with a man's weight, and the orange and brown coloured fungi were hanging in the shape of inverted cones from deck to deck. A few months trial of wood put into a ship so infected would prove the efficacy of either mode of preparation.

Exsiccation of timber in an oven, as recommended by Fourcroy, is also likely to add considerably to its durability.

One farther precaution is necessary. After a ship is built, she should lie at least six months in ordinary, with her

***
\* It is made as follows: take 12 ounces of resin, 8 of roll brimstone, 3 gallons of oil, and 4 ounces of bees wax: boil them together, and lay them on while hot. (See Nicholson's Journal, vol. xix. p. 337.)

† A solution of alum might also be tried. — [I should apprehend any saline impregnation of the planks would prove injurious to the copper sheathing and fastenings. — C.]

430 
hatchways covered to prevent the admission of rain water; some planks should be removed in the ceiling, and above the waterways of the several decks; and fires constantly kept in stoves, placed in the hold, and on the decks; by which means the moisture, that the charcoal may have attracted, will be dissipated, and the durability of the fabric insured.

Having stated these general circumstances with a view to prevent evils, which yearly exist to a great extent in the navy, I trust it will be the means of calling forth the opinions and abilities of those whose minds have been directed, or whose occupations may lead them, to a consideration of this important subject, I am, &c. &c.
NAUTICUS.
11th of November, 1811.

